# Data Management Plan
## Data Description
The research question this project is trying to answer is, generally, how animals sense stimuli. The field has identified proteins that are important for sensing the environment but how those proteins do that is sometimes still unknown. For this project, the lab is trying to solve the structure of some of these proteins in order to better understand their function.

The data that has been and will be collected are mostly experimental - some data has already been collected but much has not been collected yet. The metadata will be readme.txt, .log files, or coding scripts generated either by the entity that processes the data, usually the graduate student or an offsite facility (i.e. the PNCC, OHSU Proteomics Resource, etc). Most of the data are and will be spreadsheets, images, and videos. This project will generate data in formats like .tif, .csv, .avi as well as specialized data formats like .tar, .mmCIF, and .map. The specialized data formats are specific to the techniques used in this project and are the most suitable formats for these data types (i.e. electron micrograph data, structural mapping data, etc).
The majority of the spreadsheet data has and will be collected with an HPLC (high performance liquid chromatography) instrument. Some of the spreadsheet data is generated by the mass spectrometry resource at OHSU. The video data has and will be collected with a standard video camera. The image data has been collected with either a camera or an instrument that images gels (i.e. LiCor gel imager). These data will be stored locally on lab computers as well as on specific external hard-drives for long-term storage. The structural data will be generated at a cryo-EM center (specifically the Pacific Northwest Cryo-EM Center or PNCC). The majority of that data will be processed on their supercomputer and stored through the Pacific Northwest National Lab (PNNL) and the Protein Databank/EM Database (PDB/EMDB).

Types of data:
1.	Spreadsheet data – 1-2MB
2.	Image and video data – <1MB
3.	Structural data (raw micrographs, processed maps, etc) – 2-5TB

Physical samples will also be processed and generated in the course of this project.

## Roles and responsibilities
The research data must comply with Oregon State University's policies on data management as well as the National Institutes of Health, who is the funder of this project. This research is being conducted at OSU and uses animal tissue samples, so the datasets created over the course of this project are required by the university to be preserved for at least 3 years after project completion. In agreement with this, the NIH, as the funder of this project, requires that all research data (i.e. data needed to validate and replicate experiments) needs to be both preserved for 3 years. The NIH additionally requires that all relevant data be shared as openly as possible. The primary individual responsible for keeping this project compliant with the above goals is the PI, who does this by guiding the graduate student during their time on the project. The graduate student is responsible for maintaining the data during their time on the project and keeping it organized, properly documented, and preserved according to the PI's guidance. This allows the PI then takes over direct management of the data once the graduate student leaves. The specific roles and responsibilities of data management for this project are as follows:

•	archiving and preservation – the PI, primarily; the graduate student also play a role here to prepare data for preservation

•	data manager – the graduate student, will pass to the PI when the graduate student leaves

•	instrumentation maintenance – primarily the PI, graduate students also perform routine upkeep and maintanance

•	data collection/data generation – the graduate student 

•	data organization – the graduate student, will pass to the PI after the graduate student leaves

•	metadata generation – the PI and graduate students

•	quality control – the PI and graduate students, primarily the graduate students will perform QC at time of data collection but the PI will also assess quality throughout the data lifecycle

•	data analysis – the PI and graduate students, primarily the graduate students but the PI will guide analysis

•	DMP implementation – the PI will primarily guide DMP implementation but the graduate students will be responsible for the day-to-day work of implementation

•	access control – the PI and graduate students

•	software creation and maintenance – the graduate student

Management of the physical samples will be handled by the graduate student at OSU. Grids that get sent for analysis are kept by PNCC for up to 6 months. Purified protein sent out for analysis at the proteomics shared resource at OHSU and is managed by that facility - they largely don't keep samples and instead analyze them as soon as possible.

## Data standards and metadata

For the final structural data (i.e. the final models generated from this work), the lab will use the PDB metadata standard (.pdb or .mmCIF file types). Files output from the processing of raw data will be in the PDB/mmCIF format and will not require additional manual processing. The raw micrograph data will be stored with a metadata.txt file automatically generated by the PNCC that contains data collection parameters as well as a project description file (readme.txt type file) with context of the experiment. For the rest of the data, there aren't structured metadata standards that are applicable to these data, so the graduate student will keep these files organized with descriptive naming conventions (for example: yyyymmdd-expID) and accompany them with the following kinds of unstructured metadata. For the spreadsheet data, the graduate student will record the instrument used to collect the data, the software used to process it, and a description of the variable names in a readme.txt file. For the image and video data, the graduate student will keep a log file with the same file name (i.e. 20260511_bindingtime_wb.log to accompany 20260511_bindingtime_wb.tif) that describes what the image or video is, what experiment it is associated with, and basic parameters (i.e. what instrument was used to collect the image data). 

The data shouldn’t really need version control, but the lab plans to use careful naming conventions to keep track of versions.

For the code that will be generated for this project, the graduate student will annotate throughout the raw code to describe what the code was designed for and what each block is supposed to do.

For the physical samples, the graduate student will maintain a log file that describes the what the sample is (i.e. purified protein, tissue, etc), where it is stored, and the day it was last accessed (all physical samples are frozen and the number of times a sample is thawed/refrozen is important for sample integrity). This log will likely be a spreadsheet with annotations within the file to describe it.

## Storage and security

None of the datasets that have been or will be generated by this project need to be protected so to share them as no human subjects are involved. The lab will make the data publicallly available as follows:

•	when it will be available – For the model and raw micrograph data, a year or more prior to publication. For the image, video, and spreadsheet data, upon publication. For the code, as it is created (or more than a year prior to publication).

•	how and where will the data be made available – for the model data, the PDB or Protein Data Bank. For the raw micrographs needed to generate the model data, these will be stored on the MyEMSL archive. For the image, video, and graphing data, the lab will deposit it in the open repository Zenodo. For the code generated for this project, the lab will deposit it in GitHub.


Spreadsheet, image, and video data will be preserved by the lab for at least 3 years after the completion of this project, as required by both OSU and the NIH. The data will be stored on several shared lab computers locally, on a shared OneDrive on the cloud, and on external hard-drives. For the structural data, the datasets are too large for local storage and instead will be stored as follows: model datasets will be stored by the PDB repository, raw micrograph datasets will be stored by the MyEMSL archive at PNNL.

The lab plans to further backup the spreadsheet, image, and video data as well as the code metadata (that is stored locally) on to external hard-drives which will stay in the PI's office. For the structural datasets, those are managed and backed up by the PDB and MyEMSL repositories. 

Physical samples will be stored in the general lab freezer. Some of these samples are at biosafety level 2 (BSL-2) but are not required to be especially secure, so they will only be kept physically separate from other samples. Final purified protein will be also stored in the general lab freezer until needed, while final grids will be kept in a specialized dewar until they are shipped to the PNCC for screening and data collection.

## Access and data sharing

Model data will be made available in the common PDB/mmCIF format (for the model) and EM Map format (for the processed volume data, this is not quite the raw data files but it is commonly used to validate published models for cryo-EM). Raw micrograph data will be available as .tar files, which is standard for these data. Image data will be deposited as .tif files (which is the highest quality commonly available), video data will be deposited in both the .avi video format and as image stacks of .tif files, and the spreadsheet data will be deposited as both raw .csv files and processed data (images of final graphs and tables as .png files) – for the image, video, and graph data, there will be an accompanying readme file with metadata.

The structural data (model data) will be under a CC0 license, so it will be open access to use, reuse, and redistribution by any interested user and without need for attribution, as is standard for the PDB. The micrograph data will be under an open access license per MyEMSL archive policy. This license is most similar to a CC-BY license which allows for use and reuse by any interested users but requires attribution. The image, video, and graphing data will be deposited with a CC-BY license, so it will be openly available to use, reuse, and redistribution by interested users but use would need to be attributed to us before doing so.

Physical samples will only be accessed by those in this lab, primarily the PI or the graduate studet. Final purified samples will be sent outside OSU for other analyses and will be only accessed by personnel at those facilities.

## Archiving and preservation

The lab will preserve locally stored data for at least 3 years but some version of this data will be maintained until the PI leaves OSU.
The PDB/EMDB has special protections, and some version of it will remain preserved into perpetuity due to the interest and funding from worldwide governments. The MyEMSL archive has plans to maintain data into perpetuity as tape archives but the digital data will be phased out after access has reached 90% capacity. The remaining data will be preserved by Zenodo, which is estimated to be operational for at least the next 20 years. Access to the data stored in repositories will be maintained by the repositories themselves.


Data types preserved are the same as those that are shared, as outlined in the above section.


Physical samples not used in this project will be maintained in long-term storage in this lab until another project needs those materials or until the PI leaves OSU, whichever comes first.
